This is a resubmission of shiny 0.11 with updated license information.

As per our communication, all copyright holders listed in the sources are listed as "cph" in Authors@R. Where the copyright holders are natural persons, they are also listed as "ctb". Where the copyright holders are not natural persons, I have taken the following approach:

* jQuery: The copyright holders are "jQuery Foundation and other contributors". I have listed "jQuery Foundation" as "cph", and "jQuery contributors" as "ctb" and "cph". The jQuery contributors are listed in inst/www/shared/jquery-AUTHORS.txt, and this file is mentioned in the comment.
* jQuery UI: The jQuery UI library is also created by the jQuery foundation, but is a separate project. The copyright holders are "jQuery Foundation and other contributors". I have listed "jQuery Foundation" as "cph" (for jQuery as well as jQuery UI), and "jQuery contributors" as "ctb" and "cph". The jQuery UI contributors are listed in inst/www/shared/jqueryui/1.10.4/AUTHORS.txt, and this file is mentioned in the comment.
* Bootstrap: The copyright holder is Twitter, Inc. I have listed "Twitter, Inc", as "cph", and "Bootstrap contributors" as "ctb". The Bootstrap project page also names two creators of the project, and so I have listed them as "ctb". (According to Bootstrap's commit history, there are hundreds of others who have contributed to Bootstrap, so I have not listed them each individually.)
* es5-shim: The copyright holders are "Kristopher Michael Kowal and contributors". I have listed "Kristopher Michael Kowal" as "ctb" and "cph", and "es5-shim contributors" as "ctb" and "cph". (According to es5-shim's CONTRIBUTORS.md file, there are dozens of others who have contributed to es5-shim, so I have not listed them each individually.)
* DataTables: The copyright holder is "SpryMedia Limited". Because no natural person is listed in the documentation for DataTables, I have "SpryMedia Limited" as "ctb" and "cph".
* R: An implentation of tar() is taken from the R sources. I've listed the "R Core Team" as "ctb" and "cph".
