srcts/README.md, before:

# Using Shiny TypeScript Definitions

When developing TypeScript projects that use `window.Shiny`, we recommend installing the Shiny TypeScript definitions to your package. To install the latest stable definitions, call

```bash
yarn add https://github.com/rstudio/shiny\#v1.7.0
```

, matching the GitHub tag to your current the Shiny CRAN release (ex: `v1.7.0`).  If you are asked to select a version of `@types/jquery`, please select the closest matching version.

This will provide a global type definition of `Shiny`, let your IDE know that `window.Shiny` is of type `Shiny`, and declare a globally available variable `Shiny` within your project. You **should not** need to import anything. Similar to `jQuery`, it should _Just Work_<sup>TM</sup>.

When loading your compiled file, it should be loaded after `shiny.js` is loaded. If you are using an `htmlDependency()` to add your code to the page, your script will automatically be loaded after has been loaded.


----------------------------------------------------

# TypeScript build tools (Shiny Developers)

All files will be described as if the working directory is the root folder of `rstudio/shiny`, not relative to this `README.md` file.

## First-time setup
Shiny's TypeScript build tools use Node.js, along with [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/) v2 to manage the JavaScript packages.

Installation of Node.js differs across platforms, see [the official Node.js website](https://nodejs.org/) for instructions on downloading and installing. We presume that you have Node.js installed on your machine before continuing.

Install yarn using the [official instructions](https://yarnpkg.com/en/docs/install).

You can test that Node.js and yarn are installed properly by running the following commands:

```bash
node --version
yarn --version
```

Once both are installed, run the following in the root repo directory to install the packages :

```bash
# Sitting in `rstudio/shiny` repo
yarn install
```

### Yarn v2

This repo uses Yarn v2. If you have the latest yarn installed from brew (v1.x), Yarn will pick up on the fact that this repo is a Yarn v2 (`berry`) repo.

For compatibility with `esbuild`, the `./node_modules` is still maintained.

## Updating Node

To avoid finding and determining which is the best `node` version to use, use a package called `n` to help facilitate installing the latest stable version of node.

> `npx` is a command that allows you to run a package and command even if the package is not installed. It is distributed with the latest releases of node.

```bash
# Update to the latest stable node version
npx n stable

# View installed versions
npx n ls
```

## Adding packages
If in the future you want to upgrade or add a package, run:

```bash
yarn add --dev [packagename]
```

This will automatically add the package to the dependencies in `package.json`, and it will also update the `yarn.lock` to reflect that change. If someone other than yourself does this, simply run `yarn` to update your local packages to match the new `package.json`.

## Upgrading packages
Periodically, it's good to upgrade the packages to a recent version. There's two ways of doing this, depending on your intention:

1. Use `yarn up` to upgrade all dependencies to their latest version based on the version range specified in the package.json file (the `yarn.lock` file will be recreated as well. Yarn packages use [semantic versioning](https://yarnpkg.com/en/docs/dependency-versions), i.e. each version is writen with a maximum of 3 dot-separated numbers such that: `major.minor.patch`. For example in the version `3.1.4`, 3 is the major version number, 1 is the minor version number and 4 is the patch version number. Here are the most used operators (these appear before the version number):

  - `~` is for upgrades that keep the minor version the same (assuming that was specified);

  - `^` is for upgrades that keep the major version the same (more or less -- more specifically, it allow changes that do not modify the first non-zero digit in the version, either the 3 in 3.1.4 or the 4 in 0.4.2.). This is the default operator added to the package.json when you run `yarn add [package-name]`.

2. Use `yarn up [package]` to upgrade a single named package to the version specified by the latest tag (potentially upgrading the package across major versions).

3. To see all outdated packages, run `yarn outdated`

# TypeScript

## Learn about TypeScript

The documentation by [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/) is a solid resource to know each and every bell and whistle. Most features have examples and convey the thoughts well.

[TypeScript Deep Dive](https://basarat.gitbook.io/typescript/) is an online `bookdown`-like approach to TypeScript by "Microsoft MVP for TypeScript", Basarat Ali Syed. In his book, he goes through many examples of what you "should do", not necessarily "what is possible" like the [TypeScript docs](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/).

## TypeScript StyleGuide

Using the style guid from [TypeScript Deep Dive / StyleGuide](https://basarat.gitbook.io/typescript/styleguide), we extend it to have the usage be more familiar to R developers and preexisting Shiny development.  The goal is to produce consistent code that can be injested quickly.


### StyleGuide

* `null` vs. `undefined`
  * Do not use `x === null` unless you truly mean it.
  * Safer to use _truthy_ or _falsey_ checks instead. Ex: `if (x) {}`
* `type` vs `interface`
  * > Use `type` when you might need a union or intersection: `type Foo = number | { someProperty: number }`
  * > Use `interface` when you want extends or implements: `interface FooBar extends Foo { bar: string;}`
  * > Otherwise use whatever makes you happy that day.
* Namespace
  * `PascalCase`
  * Ex: `Shiny`

### Enforced (by `eslint`) StyleGuide

* Variable
  * `camelCase`
  * Ex: `const hello = "world`
* Class
  * `PascalCase`
  * Ex: `class InputBinding {}`
* Type, Interface definitions:
  * `PascalCase`
  * Ex: `type BindingBase = {name: string}`
  * Ex: `interface ShinyEventMessage extends JQuery.Event {}`
* Enum
  * `PascalCase`
  * (Currently unused)
* Single vs. Double Quotes
  * While the JS community has decided on single quotes, R has decided on double quotes.
  * > When you can't use double quotes, try using back ticks (`).
* Annotate Arrays as `Type[]`
  * Ex: `Foo[]` (vs `Array<Foo>`)
* Annotate Records as `{[key: string]: valueType}`
  * Ex: `const x: {[key: string]: number} = {a: 4}`
  * Ex: Extend the unknown key definition with static keys: `const x: {known: string, [key: string]: number} = {known: "yes", a: 4}`
* File Names
  * `camelCase` - Enforced by `eslint`

## Config files

The JavaScript community likes to build many small, effective packages that do minimal work. The unfortunate side effect is needing a config file for everything.

All config files are located in the root folder to avoid opening two separate VS Code projects.

* `.browserslistrc`
  * Used with `browserslist` and `core-js` to determine which polyfills should be incorporated.
* `.eslintrc.yml`
  * Used with `eslint` and `prettier` to determine how the TypeScript files should be formatted and which lint failures should cause warnings, errors, or be ignored.
* `.madgerc`
  * Package used to determine if circular dependencies are found. `type` only imports are ignored as they are not included in the final bundle.
* `.prettierrc.yml`
  * Used by `prettier` to know how to adjust code when a file is saved in VSCode or within `eslint`'s linting process.
* `yarnrc.yml`
  * Notifies `yarn` to use `yarn` v2, install `./node_modules` folder for `esbuild`, and any CLI plugins.
* `jest.config.js`
  * Used to configure [`jest` testing](https://jestjs.io/)
* `package.json`
  * Contains useful scripts that can be run by `yarn` via `yarn run SCRIPTNAME`.
  * The scripts described below are inteded for developer use. All other scripts are means to an end.
    * `yarn run watch` - Watch `srcts/src` for changes and rebuild the JavaScript files.
    * `yarn run build` - Build `shiny.js` and `shiny.min.js` in `inst/www/shared`. Both files will have a corresponding sourcemap
    * `yarn run lint` - Fix all TypeScript lints using [`eslint`](https://eslint.org/) and [`prettier`](https://prettier.io/)
    * `yarn run test` - Run all TypeScript tests
* `tsconfig.json` -
  * TypeScript config file
  * Notable options set:
    * `target: ES2021` - Compile to es2021.
    * `preserveConstEnums: false` - Do no preserve enum values into the final code. (If true, produces bloat / unused code)
    * `isolatedModules: true` & `esModuleInterop: true` - Requested by `esbuild`. This [allows for `esbuild`](https://esbuild.github.io/content-types/#typescript) to safely compile the files in parallel

## Bundle TypeScript

[esbuild](https://esbuild.github.io/) is a build tool that (for Shiny's purposes) compiles the TypeScript into a single JavaScript file.

To run all build tasks, run:

```bash
yarn build
```

It's also useful to have `esbuild` watch for updated files and immediately re-build `shiny.js` as necessary during development. This is done with:

```bash
yarn watch
```

Both JavaScript files will produce a sourcemap (`**.js.map`) that the browser will understand.  This will help you debug Shiny's JavaScript code within the browser and point back to the original TypeScript files.

### Exported types

`./extras/globalShiny.ts` contains global declarations to define `window.Shiny`, a globally available `Shiny` variable, and a globally available `Shiny` type. This file is in a parallel folder to `./src` to avoid `Shiny` from being globally accessable within the source code. However, this file is the default type definition when the Type definitions are installed by external developers.

### GitHub Actions

On push to the `main` branch or push to a Pull Request to the `main` branch, a GitHub Action will be run to make sure the bundled JavaScript code is up to date. If the source code does not compile to the exact same file, it will be committed an pushed back to the outdated branch. (This makes it so the full build tools are not necessary for small tweaks and comments. 🎉)

<!-- #### Auto build and browser refresh

An alternative to `yarn watch` is to use `entr` to trigger `grunt` when sources change. `entr` can be installed with `brew install entr` on a Mac, or on Linux using your distribution's package manager. Using this technique, it's possible to both automatically rebuild sources and reload Chrome at the same time:

*macOS*:

```bash
find ../srcts/ | entr bash -c './node_modules/grunt/bin/grunt && osascript -e "tell application \"Google Chrome\" to reload active tab of window 1"'
```

*Linux*:

For this to work you must first install `xdotool` using your distribution's package manager.

```bash
find ../srcts/ | entr bash -c './node_modules/grunt/bin/grunt && xdotool search --onlyvisible --class Chrome windowfocus key ctrl+r'
``` -->
# Updating dependencies
### `@types/jquery`

As of v3.5.5, `@types/jquery` produces a globally available constant of `$` and `jQuery`. This is problematic as TypeScript is there to enforce that all variables are accounted for. Declaring that these two variables exist globally removes the requirement to import `$` (or `jQuery`). This is bad for Shiny as the `$` would not be enforced to the "within package" `$`.

To overcome this, a patch is used to remove the globally defined `$` (and `Symbol`) variable declarations. Yarn v2 has a [`patch` protocol](https://yarnpkg.com/features/protocols#patch) that allows a local patch to be applied to the publically available `@types/jquery` package upon installation.

If in the future where the variables are not globally declared anymore, the patch may be removed and `@types/jquery` can be imported directly.

A global module plugin is used by `esbuild` to swap out a real `jquery` module to just return `window.jQuery`. This allows for tests and core code to behave the same way.

### `core-js`

To update the version of `core-js`:

* Check if there is a newer version available by running `yarn outdated core-js`. (If there's no output, then you have the latest version.)
* Run `yarn add --dev core-js --exact`.


### External libraries

Shiny already has a handful of html dependencies that should NOT be bundled within `shiny.js`.  To update the dependencies below, see the directions in [`tools/README.md`](../tools).
* `jquery` / `@types/jquery`
* `bootstrap` / `@types/bootstrap`
  * Bootstrap is not being updated anymore. Only bootstrap 3.4 will be utilized within shiny.js. To use the latest bootstrap, see [`rstudio/bslib`](https://github.com/rstudio/bslib)
* `bootstrap-datepicker` / `@types/bootstrap-datepicker`
* `ion-rangeslider` / `@types/ion-rangeslider`
* `selectize` / `@types/selectize`

Commit message:

Update srcts/README with info about window.Shiny

srcts/README.md, after:

# Using Shiny TypeScript Definitions

When developing TypeScript projects that use `window.Shiny`, we recommend installing the Shiny TypeScript definitions to your package. To install the latest stable definitions, run one of the following (depending on if you're using `npm` or `yarn`):

```bash
npm install https://github.com/rstudio/shiny\#v1.10.0 --save-dev
# or
yarn add https://github.com/rstudio/shiny\#v1.10.0 --dev
```

, matching the GitHub tag to your current the Shiny CRAN release (ex: `v1.10.0`).  If you are asked to select a version of `@types/jquery`, please select the closest matching version.

This will provide a global type definition of `window.Shiny`. In your code, you can access the Shiny object via `window.Shiny` or just `Shiny`. However, note that if you are using TypeScript, it will be OK with `window.Shiny` but it will flag uses of `Shiny` (without the `window.` prefix), because TypeScript won't know that it's a global variable. We consider it better practice to use `window.Shiny` instead of `Shiny`, but if you want TypeScript to know that `Shiny` is available as a global variable, you can add the following to a TypeScript file in your code base.

```ts
 declare global {
  const Shiny: ShinyClass;
}
```

When loading your compiled file, it should be loaded after `shiny.js` is loaded. If you are using an `htmlDependency()` to add your code to the page, your script will automatically be loaded after has been loaded.


----------------------------------------------------

# TypeScript build tools (Shiny Developers)

All files will be described as if the working directory is the root folder of `rstudio/shiny`, not relative to this `README.md` file.

## First-time setup
Shiny's TypeScript build tools use Node.js, along with [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/) v2 to manage the JavaScript packages.

Installation of Node.js differs across platforms, see [the official Node.js website](https://nodejs.org/) for instructions on downloading and installing. We presume that you have Node.js installed on your machine before continuing.

Install yarn using the [official instructions](https://yarnpkg.com/en/docs/install).

You can test that Node.js and yarn are installed properly by running the following commands:

```bash
node --version
yarn --version
```

Once both are installed, run the following in the root repo directory to install the packages :

```bash
# Sitting in `rstudio/shiny` repo
yarn install
```

### Yarn v2

This repo uses Yarn v2. If you have the latest yarn installed from brew (v1.x), Yarn will pick up on the fact that this repo is a Yarn v2 (`berry`) repo.

For compatibility with `esbuild`, the `./node_modules` is still maintained.

## Updating Node

To avoid finding and determining which is the best `node` version to use, use a package called `n` to help facilitate installing the latest stable version of node.

> `npx` is a command that allows you to run a package and command even if the package is not installed. It is distributed with the latest releases of node.

```bash
# Update to the latest stable node version
npx n stable

# View installed versions
npx n ls
```

## Adding packages
If in the future you want to upgrade or add a package, run:

```bash
yarn add --dev [packagename]
```

This will automatically add the package to the dependencies in `package.json`, and it will also update the `yarn.lock` to reflect that change. If someone other than yourself does this, simply run `yarn` to update your local packages to match the new `package.json`.

## Upgrading packages
Periodically, it's good to upgrade the packages to a recent version. There's two ways of doing this, depending on your intention:

1. Use `yarn up` to upgrade all dependencies to their latest version based on the version range specified in the package.json file (the `yarn.lock` file will be recreated as well. Yarn packages use [semantic versioning](https://yarnpkg.com/en/docs/dependency-versions), i.e. each version is writen with a maximum of 3 dot-separated numbers such that: `major.minor.patch`. For example in the version `3.1.4`, 3 is the major version number, 1 is the minor version number and 4 is the patch version number. Here are the most used operators (these appear before the version number):

  - `~` is for upgrades that keep the minor version the same (assuming that was specified);

  - `^` is for upgrades that keep the major version the same (more or less -- more specifically, it allow changes that do not modify the first non-zero digit in the version, either the 3 in 3.1.4 or the 4 in 0.4.2.). This is the default operator added to the package.json when you run `yarn add [package-name]`.

2. Use `yarn up [package]` to upgrade a single named package to the version specified by the latest tag (potentially upgrading the package across major versions).

3. To see all outdated packages, run `yarn outdated`

# TypeScript

## Learn about TypeScript

The documentation by [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/) is a solid resource to know each and every bell and whistle. Most features have examples and convey the thoughts well.

[TypeScript Deep Dive](https://basarat.gitbook.io/typescript/) is an online `bookdown`-like approach to TypeScript by "Microsoft MVP for TypeScript", Basarat Ali Syed. In his book, he goes through many examples of what you "should do", not necessarily "what is possible" like the [TypeScript docs](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/).

## TypeScript StyleGuide

Using the style guid from [TypeScript Deep Dive / StyleGuide](https://basarat.gitbook.io/typescript/styleguide), we extend it to have the usage be more familiar to R developers and preexisting Shiny development.  The goal is to produce consistent code that can be injested quickly.


### StyleGuide

* `null` vs. `undefined`
  * Do not use `x === null` unless you truly mean it.
  * Safer to use _truthy_ or _falsey_ checks instead. Ex: `if (x) {}`
* `type` vs `interface`
  * > Use `type` when you might need a union or intersection: `type Foo = number | { someProperty: number }`
  * > Use `interface` when you want extends or implements: `interface FooBar extends Foo { bar: string;}`
  * > Otherwise use whatever makes you happy that day.
* Namespace
  * `PascalCase`
  * Ex: `Shiny`

### Enforced (by `eslint`) StyleGuide

* Variable
  * `camelCase`
  * Ex: `const hello = "world`
* Class
  * `PascalCase`
  * Ex: `class InputBinding {}`
* Type, Interface definitions:
  * `PascalCase`
  * Ex: `type BindingBase = {name: string}`
  * Ex: `interface ShinyEventMessage extends JQuery.Event {}`
* Enum
  * `PascalCase`
  * (Currently unused)
* Single vs. Double Quotes
  * While the JS community has decided on single quotes, R has decided on double quotes.
  * > When you can't use double quotes, try using back ticks (`).
* Annotate Arrays as `Type[]`
  * Ex: `Foo[]` (vs `Array<Foo>`)
* Annotate Records as `{[key: string]: valueType}`
  * Ex: `const x: {[key: string]: number} = {a: 4}`
  * Ex: Extend the unknown key definition with static keys: `const x: {known: string, [key: string]: number} = {known: "yes", a: 4}`
* File Names
  * `camelCase` - Enforced by `eslint`

## Config files

The JavaScript community likes to build many small, effective packages that do minimal work. The unfortunate side effect is needing a config file for everything.

All config files are located in the root folder to avoid opening two separate VS Code projects.

* `.browserslistrc`
  * Used with `browserslist` and `core-js` to determine which polyfills should be incorporated.
* `.eslintrc.yml`
  * Used with `eslint` and `prettier` to determine how the TypeScript files should be formatted and which lint failures should cause warnings, errors, or be ignored.
* `.madgerc`
  * Package used to determine if circular dependencies are found. `type` only imports are ignored as they are not included in the final bundle.
* `.prettierrc.yml`
  * Used by `prettier` to know how to adjust code when a file is saved in VSCode or within `eslint`'s linting process.
* `yarnrc.yml`
  * Notifies `yarn` to use `yarn` v2, install `./node_modules` folder for `esbuild`, and any CLI plugins.
* `jest.config.js`
  * Used to configure [`jest` testing](https://jestjs.io/)
* `package.json`
  * Contains useful scripts that can be run by `yarn` via `yarn run SCRIPTNAME`.
  * The scripts described below are inteded for developer use. All other scripts are means to an end.
    * `yarn run watch` - Watch `srcts/src` for changes and rebuild the JavaScript files.
    * `yarn run build` - Build `shiny.js` and `shiny.min.js` in `inst/www/shared`. Both files will have a corresponding sourcemap
    * `yarn run lint` - Fix all TypeScript lints using [`eslint`](https://eslint.org/) and [`prettier`](https://prettier.io/)
    * `yarn run test` - Run all TypeScript tests
* `tsconfig.json` -
  * TypeScript config file
  * Notable options set:
    * `target: ES2021` - Compile to es2021.
    * `preserveConstEnums: false` - Do no preserve enum values into the final code. (If true, produces bloat / unused code)
    * `isolatedModules: true` & `esModuleInterop: true` - Requested by `esbuild`. This [allows for `esbuild`](https://esbuild.github.io/content-types/#typescript) to safely compile the files in parallel

## Bundle TypeScript

[esbuild](https://esbuild.github.io/) is a build tool that (for Shiny's purposes) compiles the TypeScript into a single JavaScript file.

To run all build tasks, run:

```bash
yarn build
```

It's also useful to have `esbuild` watch for updated files and immediately re-build `shiny.js` as necessary during development. This is done with:

```bash
yarn watch
```

Both JavaScript files will produce a sourcemap (`**.js.map`) that the browser will understand.  This will help you debug Shiny's JavaScript code within the browser and point back to the original TypeScript files.

### Exported types

`./extras/globalShiny.ts` contains global declarations to define `window.Shiny`, a globally available `Shiny` variable, and a globally available `ShinyClass` type. This file is in a parallel folder to `./src` to avoid `Shiny` from being globally accessable within the source code. However, this file is the default type definition when the Type definitions are installed by external developers.

### GitHub Actions

On push to the `main` branch or push to a Pull Request to the `main` branch, a GitHub Action will be run to make sure the bundled JavaScript code is up to date. If the source code does not compile to the exact same file, it will be committed an pushed back to the outdated branch. (This makes it so the full build tools are not necessary for small tweaks and comments. 🎉)

<!-- #### Auto build and browser refresh

An alternative to `yarn watch` is to use `entr` to trigger `grunt` when sources change. `entr` can be installed with `brew install entr` on a Mac, or on Linux using your distribution's package manager. Using this technique, it's possible to both automatically rebuild sources and reload Chrome at the same time:

*macOS*:

```bash
find ../srcts/ | entr bash -c './node_modules/grunt/bin/grunt && osascript -e "tell application \"Google Chrome\" to reload active tab of window 1"'
```

*Linux*:

For this to work you must first install `xdotool` using your distribution's package manager.

```bash
find ../srcts/ | entr bash -c './node_modules/grunt/bin/grunt && xdotool search --onlyvisible --class Chrome windowfocus key ctrl+r'
``` -->
# Updating dependencies
### `@types/jquery`

As of v3.5.5, `@types/jquery` produces a globally available constant of `$` and `jQuery`. This is problematic as TypeScript is there to enforce that all variables are accounted for. Declaring that these two variables exist globally removes the requirement to import `$` (or `jQuery`). This is bad for Shiny as the `$` would not be enforced to the "within package" `$`.

To overcome this, a patch is used to remove the globally defined `$` (and `Symbol`) variable declarations. Yarn v2 has a [`patch` protocol](https://yarnpkg.com/features/protocols#patch) that allows a local patch to be applied to the publically available `@types/jquery` package upon installation.

If in the future where the variables are not globally declared anymore, the patch may be removed and `@types/jquery` can be imported directly.

A global module plugin is used by `esbuild` to swap out a real `jquery` module to just return `window.jQuery`. This allows for tests and core code to behave the same way.

### `core-js`

To update the version of `core-js`:

* Check if there is a newer version available by running `yarn outdated core-js`. (If there's no output, then you have the latest version.)
* Run `yarn add --dev core-js --exact`.


### External libraries

Shiny already has a handful of html dependencies that should NOT be bundled within `shiny.js`.  To update the dependencies below, see the directions in [`tools/README.md`](../tools).
* `jquery` / `@types/jquery`
* `bootstrap` / `@types/bootstrap`
  * Bootstrap is not being updated anymore. Only bootstrap 3.4 will be utilized within shiny.js. To use the latest bootstrap, see [`rstudio/bslib`](https://github.com/rstudio/bslib)
* `bootstrap-datepicker` / `@types/bootstrap-datepicker`
* `ion-rangeslider` / `@types/ion-rangeslider`
* `selectize` / `@types/selectize`
